Hi friends, my name is Chris and this is No Boiler Plate where I focus on fast technical videos. Today I'm going to demo my 2026 toolkit for writing Rust containing a dozen or so tools and packages that I use in every project along with smart default config. I'll start with the single tool that I manage nearly all of this with Dev. Not everyone is powerful enough to use Nyx. I know I wasn't for many years, but there is a gateway drug available in DevN, which you can think of as a JSON-like DSL or schema that gives you access to the largest package repository on the planet, config for those packages, and per project isolation without the overhead of containers. Finally, no more VMs to run Docker on Mac in. Just look at what we've got configured in a single file. There's the Rust installation set to nightly with Rust Analyzer and Clippy system packages including Bacon and Cargo Seek. More on them later. We've defined scripts that will be available inside the dev that themselves have isolated dependencies. We can include C libraries without touching the outside system or any other projects and can even set environment variables, auto run scripts when activating, and Dev even supports pre-commit hooks like Clippy and Rust format out of the box. Look, you don't have to use DevN. Indeed, the rest of this video won't assume you do. I'm not saying that developers who don't use Nyx should go to prison yet. But isn't it cool that you can get all this in a single config file that you can check into your project's repo and share with your colleagues? Side note, I acknowledge to the Nyx nation that though you can certainly do all of this with Nyx out of the box, you can't do it as simply. If you want one tool to rule them all, it's Devan. And to learn more, you may watch this terrific video by Vimoyer. However, I'm not here to just give you a config file and send you on your way. Let me show you how I use all these together. I dedicate my video scripts to the public domain. Everything you see here, script, links, and images, are part of a markdown document written, recorded by me, available freely on my website, namau.com, and at GitHub. This video is sponsored by Let's Get Rusty. More on that later. Part one, tooling. If you're not using DevN, then the first thing you'll need to bootstrap your Rust environment, whatever your operating system, is the RustUp installer, version, and component manager. Run the oneliner here from Rustup.rs. Then, when it's installed, switch to nightly. While you may stay on the stable version if you have very good reason, I have been using nightly since 2020. The benefits, not least compile times, have been worth the one or two occasions I've had to switch back to stable with rust up default stable. Like just this week, the new trait solver that dropped in nightly can make some crates like Apache Data Fusion compile more than eight times faster. This is Rust. Nightbees are really stable. Now Rust is installed. It's time to speedrun the primary tool for interacting with the whole ecosystem. Cargo cargo new creates a blank Rust project with a hello world main file and a cargo.l config. Then before opening your browser and heading to crates.io or my favorite lib. RS to find a package for this or that. Try cargo search. Your search results are right in your terminal ready to add without opening your cargo toml with cargo add specifying any features you need using the feature flag. Cargo info is very useful too to see more detail on the crate before installing it. Especially useful to check the features you might need to enable. Cargo seek is a pretty TUI wrapping all three of these commands which you can install using cargo's binary installer command cargo install. In this case, run cargo install cargo-seek. And after compilation, the cargo seek binary will be added to the cargo/bin directory, which you should make sure is in your path. Rust comes included with all the batteries you need to get up and running, including the most comprehensive llinter and code checker you will have ever used called Clippy. Out of the box, it's fine, but you can give it teeth. Here is my Clippy config, which I recommend using by default in every project. The groups pedantic and nursery will teach you good rust patterns, and the rest of the lints stop you writing code that can crash. To allow for fast prototyping where it should be in tests, allow panicking there with these clippy overrides. For more details and a rationale for this unhinged pedentry, see my dedicated Rust video, Rust, don't panic. Bacon. In addition to setting up your editor with the LSP server that comes with Rustup, Rust Analyzer, I recommend running Bacon Clippy in a terminal, watching the excellent output, and following its advice. Remember that the first error in your file is not always the one to fix. The first error in the compiler output usually is though you can test your code with cargo test and dock test with cargo test doc and benchmark it all with cargo bench, your testing will be much more powerful and almost as important, prettier with next test. Next test allows you to detect and handle slow tests, automatically retry some tests, mark them as heavy, run them serally, record every test run, replace CI runs locally, rerun failing tests, collect test coverage, do mutation testing, spin up debuggers, observe system behavior with drace and BPF trace probes, and it does all this up to three times faster than cargo test. Pretty good, right? Cargo generate allows you to specify internet accessible templates to quickly scaffold larger frameworks such as a web app. The example here is from Laptops. More on that crate later. Watch Exec evolved from the old staple of cargo watch. This rewrite watches a directory of optionally filtered files and triggers any chain of commands you like, not just cargo ones. I keep it around for chaining cargo clippy, cargo test, and cargo run into a pipeline that kicks off whenever I save. Neoim. There are many editors, but this one is mine. Neoim is the fastest editor out there, and I love the feeling of near infinite bandwidth between my brain and my code. Neim has built-in LSP and nearly everything you might want, but it requires configuring. While you may watch this video from Bread on Penguins on how to do it from scratch, a fun weekend project, I need sensible defaults that work out of the box and that is lazy vim. Clone and run neovim and everything works with no configuration. See my video writing at the speed of thought for details on why you should learn vim keybindings. Good options I also have installed are Helix, VS Code, and Zed, all with the Vim Key bindings. If you're looking to start your journey or hone your skills, do consider Rust training by friend of the channel, Let's Get Rusty. In addition to being a fellow Rust YouTuber, Bogdan runs Rust training, both corporate and personal, with a new cohort starting next month. Visit let's getrusty.com/startwithris, link in the pinned comment, to find out more about the training. And thanks so much to Let's Get Rusty for sponsoring this video. Part two, my standard library. Rust has a very rich standard library providing loads of functions and types for highle and low-level applications. Some might say it has too many string types, but we can augment this with some crates that are so ubiquitous and mature that they have become my own personal standard library. Rust handles errors in such a sensible way that it finally allows senior developers to sleep at night. The result type is used in any fallible function so you always know what you are going to get and there are no exceptions to the type system like null. See my video rust on rails for more details there. But specifying all the kinds of errors a function can return gets old fast and so the community standardized on the anyhow crate my favorite fork of which is air and specifically color air which allows for beautiful as well as ergonomic error handling. Honorable mention root cause. Ergonomic Rust programs are often built around data that is mutated by iterators in a pipeline. And like the Python library of the same name, it tools contains advanced iterator functions for shuffling, zipping and unzipping and working with higher dimension iterables. And remember this is Rust. It all compiles down to for loops and if statements. It's a zerocost abstraction. The cost being your sanity. Cargo Bench, like Cargo Test, has a pluggable back end, and Criterion provides advanced statistics and report generation, which even include pretty GNU plot charts. Rayon is the simplest parallelism library you'll ever use. Try it before you reach for heavyweight async frameworks. For more information, see my video async isn't real and can't hurt you. If you build your logic in Rust's lazy iterators mutated by simple functions, you can make your whole pipeline parallel by changing it to parit. Part three, go-to crates. So, I've shown you my essential standard library of crates that I seem to use in every one of my projects. Now, here are some rock stars that I use in nearly every project. SI nearly every application needs to serialize or deserialize data, which in Rust means the SI crate. If you're not using it directly, your dependencies certainly are. Honorable mention, Nanoerti, Chif, ergonomic time handling. The standard library is fine, but we can do better. Honorable mention Krono Clap. Rust's built-in argument passing is good, but far better is to use the derived feature of Clap and organize it all into a neat strct with past data and help documentation derived for you. Remember kids, it's ARG pass, not ARG validate. Do it once and ideally let Clap do it for you. Honorable mention, BPAF. Rust's built-in command execution library is comprehensive, but a little too lowlevel for my liking. The command run crate is just right. optionally allowing us to wrap the execution in a result, combine standard error and standard out and format the command as a string, not a builder. Utopyer continuing the bad spelling of crates like request. Utoper allows any popular backend Rust framework from Axom to rocket to become a self-documenting statically typed REST API. Speaking of request, yes, it's spelled like that. The authors say they chose that spelling because it makes it easier to search for a unique name. Given the number of furries in our wonderful Rust community, I somewhat doubt that was the only reason. Request has both sync and async versions of your favorite HTTP verbs and operates by default on Rust LS, the pure Rust cryptographic library that can replace OpenSSL. SQL X combine Utoper with the compile time verified queries of SQL X and your business logic is modeled in a single strct across models, views, and controllers. Install the SQL X CLI for DB management, migrations, and offline validation. Leptos for front-end web. I like the extremely comprehensive leptos crate, though it also supports serverside rendering and therefore could be used on the back end. The ergonomics breakdown for me when using that feature. The trunk utility is the Swiss Army knife here, providing hot reloading, autobundling of CSS and static assets, Tailwind integration, and like a billion other features. You don't have to write React anymore. Or React Native thanks to the Dioxysus Crate, which bundles up your app into Android, iOS, or desktop apps with batteries included and hot reloading. For a lighter option that just replaces Electron, try the Tory crate based on native web view. That's all I have for you. Head over to dev.sh and get cracking. Thank you. If you'd like to support my channel, get early ad free and tracking free videos, your name in the credits or one-to-one mentoring, head to my Patreon. If you're interested in transhumanism and hope punk, please check out my weekly sci-fi audio podcast, Lost Terminal. If you like urban fantasy, I produce a wonderful podcast called Modem Prometheus. We just finished season 3 of the Phosphine Catalog. If you like mysteries and art, check it out. Transcripts and compile checked markdown source code are available on namtalow.com and GitHub. Links in the description and corrections are in the pinned erata comment. Thank you so much for watching. Talk to you on Discord.
